[DOCS] Adds piece about possible biases in ml processes (#721)
elastic/stack-docs: docs/en/stack/ml-biases.asciidoc

[[ml-biases]]

> === Possible biases in {ml} processes

Reviewer: I think we might want to reconsider this title, depending on where it lands in the book. If it's one of the introductory topics, we might want to make it less scary.  e.g. Change it to something like "Eliminating biases in {ml}" or "The ethics of {ml}" or "With great power..." (okay, I think I'm kidding on that last one)

{ml-cap} is meant to improve our everyday life in a wide palette of activities 

> across the globe. People use {ml} in science, healthcare, business, 

Reviewer: Not mandatory, but I think it's more compelling if we stick with "we" or "you" instead of "people", etc:
```suggestion
across the globe. We use {ml} in science, healthcare, business, 
```

> entertainment, and many other fields. Decisions are made backed by {ml} 

Reviewer: Ditto re avoiding passive voice. Something like this?
```suggestion
entertainment, and many other fields. We make decisions based on {ml} results.
```

> techniques. In such a setup, it is crucial to keep in mind the possible biases 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is therefore crucial to keep in mind the possible biases 
```

that can corrupt results, endanger fairness, and jeopardize the success of even 

> the best-intended initiative. Some of these social biases can make their way to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the best-intended initiative. Some of these social biases can make their way into 
```

> the {ml} analytics results more easily than we might think.

Reviewer: IMO "analytics" is unnecessary here:
```suggestion
the {ml} results more easily than we might think.
```

There are various possible biases that can negatively influence the result of a 
{ml} analysis. *These biases typically are not present in the {ml} algorithms 
that are used*, but rather exist in the datasets themselves or in the way the 
results are interpreted. We take a look at the two main types of biases: data 
related ones and interpretation related ones and recommend some basic practices 

> to avoid them. However, it is still important to remember that the problems 

Reviewer: > We take a look...

I think this can be shortened to something like this, since you've already covered the two types in the previous sentence:

Let's consider some basic practices to avoid them.

or 

There are some basic practices that you can use to avoid them.

thematized in this piece are not solved yet. In fact, they are only a part of a 
greater question about the ethics behind technology.

[float]
==== Biases in datasets

> Built-in biases are inserted in the data that we use to train the {ml} model. 

Reviewer: Inserted in seems to imply an intentional activity. Could we change to "exist" instead?
```suggestion
Built-in biases exist in the data that we use to train {ml} models. 
```

Author: Sure! Great sentence, thank you!

For example, it could be the result of manual labeling when the dataset has been 

> annotated with the "ground truth" based on preconception or prejudice. The model 

Reviewer: > For example ... based on preconception or prejudice.

I think we should assume good intentions.  Maybe soften it like this?

> When we use supervised {ml} techniques, we annotate our data with the "ground truth", which is another opportunity to unwittingly introduce preconceptions or prejudice.

Author: @lcawl Also thank you for this! I assumed that preconception is something that works already unwittingly! It'll be more exact this way.

will inherently learn the bias, therefore the analysis will be also infected, 
while technically the algorithm works exactly as intended.

It is impossible to avoid all the potential biases in the dataset. Eventually, 

> data is the representation of reality and, like any other type of 

Reviewer: Not a big deal, but I think there's many possible representations, not just one..
```suggestion
data is a representation of reality and, like any other type of 
```

> representation, it never perfectly concurs with its subject. It is possible, 

Reviewer: > It is possible...

I think this is another place where it's important to make it personal.  For example:

However, you can and should carefully scrutinize...

however, to carefully scrutinize a dataset and make sure that it's not selected 
in a predetermined way and it matches the real world as close as possible. To 
involve people with diverse backgrounds in the processes that require humans can 
also be a solution to minimize the chance of biases.

[float]
==== Biases in interpretation

> People who interpret the data can also be biased, for example, when they would 

Reviewer: > People who ...

This is another one I think we can make "you" or "we".  For example:

When we interpret data we can also be biased.  For example, we might want to validate ...

like to validate a hypothesis based on the results of an analysis. In these 
cases, the outcome of the analysis or the decision that is based on the analysis 
can be inaccurate even if the dataset itself is carefully designed.

It is safer to formulate the aim of the analysis in a way that does not contain 
the expected results, interpret the outcome of the analysis multiple times 
with different persons, and perform tests as much as possible.

[float]
==== Collective responsibility

The issue of biases that can affect {ml} related processes is far from solved. 

> In fact, this is a field of an ongoing dispute and there are no universal 

Reviewer: Probably more than one?
```suggestion
In fact, this is a field of ongoing disputes and there are no universal 
```

> answers for the emerged problems. Because of the various factors that can 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
answers for the emerging problems. Because of the various factors that can 
```

influence the {ml} processes, avoiding bias-influenced analysis is a collective 
responsibility of all the persons that participate in these processes; from the 
designer of the dataset to the person who interprets the outcome of the analysis 

> to the ones who make decisions based on the data.

Reviewer: This feels like it needs an uplifting "call to action" at the end.  Something along these lines?:

> Talk to your team about the real possibility of introducing and reinforcing biases at each step in the process. Make plans, share techniques, and be open to reconsidering results that seem too good to be true.

[[ml-biases]]

> === Eliminating biases in {ml} processes

Reviewer 2: agree with this - other suggestions in addition to Camilla's "Understanding Biases", "Addressing Biases".

{ml-cap} is meant to improve our everyday life in a wide palette of activities 
across the globe. We use {ml} in science, healthcare, business, entertainment, 
and many other fields. We make decisions based on {ml} results. It is therefore 
crucial to keep in mind the possible biases that can corrupt results, endanger 
fairness, and jeopardize the success of even the best-intended initiative. Some 
of these social biases can make their way into the {ml} results more easily than 
we might think.

There are various possible biases that can negatively influence the result of a 
{ml} analysis. *These biases typically are not present in the {ml} algorithms 

> that are used*, but rather exist in the datasets themselves or in the way the 

Reviewer 2: we do have a concept of `bias` in algorithms - Bias are the simplifying assumptions made by a model to make the target function easier to learn. We might want to clarify that this doc is about the statistical/social biases and not about the bias in the algorithms.

results are interpreted. These issues are part of a greater question about the 
ethics behind technology and there's no one solution for everyone. However, 
there are some basic practices you can use to reduce these biases.

[float]
==== Biases in datasets

Built-in biases exist in the data that we use to train {ml} models. For example,

> our choice of which data to collect or analyze unwittingly reflect our ideas 

Reviewer 3: I would remove the word "unwittingly" here, because you are making conscious choices when collecting data and these choices reflect what you think is important. What you are perhaps not thinking is the unintended consequences of your choices or how your own background affects these choices.

> our choice of which data to collect or analyze unwittingly reflect our ideas 

Reviewer 2: Not only what data is chosen to be collected, but what data is even available. This is a subtle difference, as a lot of training is done on available open datasets - namely people often rely on others to do the collection. I came across an interesting example recently - models for "repeat offenders" in the criminal justice system only train on - you guessed it - repeat offenders. Data is not collected for those who leave prison and act in accordance with the law. The problem here is both in the data collection (i.e. this data should be collected) and the data availability (in the absence of this data being collected, how can we address this).

about what is important or worthy of attention. But the bias could be also the 
result of manual labeling when the dataset has been annotated with the "ground 
truth", which is another opportunity to unwittingly introduce preconceptions or 
prejudice. The model will inherently learn the bias, therefore the analysis will 

> be also infected, while technically the algorithm works exactly as intended.

Reviewer 3: I would use another word instead of "infected", because it has a very medical connotation.

It is impossible to avoid all the potential biases in the dataset. Eventually, 
data is a representation of reality and, like any other type of representation, 

> it never perfectly concurs with its subject. However, you can and should 

Reviewer 3: I would say here that data can never perfectly capture all possible variables affecting a given phenomenon.

carefully scrutinize your dataset, ensure it's not selected in a predetermined 
way and it matches the real world as close as possible. Involve people with 
diverse backgrounds in the processes that require humans, it is also a solution 
to minimize the chance of biases.

[float]

> ==== Biases in interpretation

Reviewer 2: It might be good to add something here about "blind interpretation." That is, these algorithms shouldn't be applied without a thorough understand on the data and its shortcomings arrived at through an analysis. Data is an artifact of so many different things addressed above, and this should be understood.

When we interpret data, we can also be biased. For example, when we might want 
to validate a hypothesis based on the results of an analysis. In these cases, 
the outcome of the analysis or the decision that is based on the analysis can be 
inaccurate even if the dataset itself is carefully designed.

It is safer to formulate the aim of the analysis in a way that does not contain 
the expected results, interpret the outcome of the analysis multiple times 
with different persons, and perform tests as much as possible.

[float]
==== Collective responsibility

The issue of biases that can affect {ml} related processes is far from solved. 
In fact, this is a field of ongoing disputes and there are no universal answers 
for the emerging problems. Because of the various factors that can influence the 
{ml} processes, avoiding bias-influenced analysis is a collective responsibility 
of all the persons that participate in these processes; from the designer of the 
dataset to the person who interprets the outcome of the analysis to the ones who 

> make decisions based on the data. Talk to your team about the real possibility 

Reviewer 3: Saying that a given problem is not suitable for ML applications should also be a valid option. Talk to your team about whether or not ML solutions are appropriate for this problem.

> make decisions based on the data. Talk to your team about the real possibility 

Reviewer 2: Also, us. "from the designers of the dataset to the people who interpret the outcome of the analysis to the ones who make decisions based on the data and the companies that offer the platforms to make these decisions"

[[ml-biases]]
=== Considering biases in {ml} processes

{ml-cap} is meant to improve our everyday life in a wide palette of activities 
across the globe. We use {ml} in science, healthcare, business, entertainment, 
and many other fields. We make decisions based on {ml} results. It is, 
therefore, crucial to keep in mind the possible biases that can corrupt results, 
endanger fairness, and jeopardize the success of even the best-intended 
initiative. Some of these biases can make their way into the {ml} results more 
easily than we might think.

> Various possible biases can negatively influence the result of a {ml} analysis. 

Reviewer 3: And add here something of the sort `and affect the people concerned`, otherwise it seems a little bit that the only reason you care about biases is because your ML analysis will be bad, while in reality you need to care about the people being impacted.

In this piece, we'll talk about statistical and social biases (without 
addressing the numerous subtypes of them individually), and not about the 
possible biases in the {ml} algorithms themselves. Statistical and social biases 
can exist in the datasets used to train {ml} models or in the way the 

> predictions of these models are interpreted. These issues are part of a greater 

Reviewer 3: Here, `These issues are part of a greater 
question about the ethics behind technology and there's no one solution for 
everyone.` , "there's no one for solution for everyone", because it is not specific enough to the topic under discussion (bias in ML) and strays a bit into a discussion of moral relativism (what x thinks is ok, is not what y thinks is ok, which is probably not what we want to allude to in the docs). Instead I'd rephrase like this

"These issues are part of a greater question about the ethics behind technology. While there are no quick technological fixes for removing bias from ML systems,  there are some basic practices you can use to detect and reduce these."

collection, you need to be even more aware of the possible consequences and 
understand how the data has been collected and selected. Cleaning up "messy 
data" is also an operation when the dataset could be biased. Messiness couldn't 
be only the result of human error in the design or the collection process, but 
instead an immanent characteristic of the real world. The bias can be also the 
result of manual labeling when the dataset has been annotated with the "ground 
truth", which is another opportunity to unwittingly introduce preconceptions or 
prejudice. The model will inherently learn the bias, therefore the analysis will 
be also compromised, while technically the algorithm works exactly as intended. 

It is impossible to avoid all the potential biases in the dataset. Eventually, 
data is a representation of reality and, like any other type of representation, 
it never perfectly captures all possible variables affecting a given phenomenon. 
However, you can and should carefully scrutinize your dataset, ensure it's not 
selected in a predetermined way and it matches the real world as close as 
possible. Involve people with diverse backgrounds in the processes that require 

> humans, it is also a solution to minimize the chance of biases.

Reviewer 3: I would rewrite this sentence "Involve people with diverse backgrounds in the processes that require 
humans, it is also a solution to minimize the chance of biases." to say
"Involve people with diverse backgrounds in the design, construction and evaluation of ML systems."
